You learned in part one, what led up
to Ron Davis' epiphany as a dyslexic.
In this interview, he explains what it's like
to be inside the head of a dyslexic and autistic
and how a dyslexic can turn their trait off and on.
This, in turn, leads him to the topic
of our educational system,
and how it is not meeting the needs
of the kinds of children being born today.
Interesting is what's happening as a result
of the interface between kids
and computer games
starting back even about 15 years ago
when MTV first started coming on and Pong,
which was the beginning of the shortening of images
where our brain was only getting...
In my video industry, I know this because
we used to have long dreamy shots
years ago when we were producing.
They got shorter and shorter.
By the time MTV came along,
you were talking about a 10-frame shots,
a third of a second, one after another.
With the kids watching this,
it had to have impacted the way their brains developed.
It's chicken or egg.
Yeah.
Are they accommodating it
because that's how fast the brain's already operating
and now it's lightning speeds where...
I'm watching my nephew, for example,
with one of the new video, sophisticated video games
where I can see his brain is entrained
and he's in an altered state and he does this.
It's all he wants to do.
Schoolwork for these kids means nothing.
They want to live in this world.
Yeah.
Where they're going to the next level
where things are moving at lightning speed.
What's happening with this?
Well, when we are thinking with images,
and all human beings do,
when we're doing it naturally, we're not aware
of the process.
We're not aware of what it is we're actually thinking.
We're aware of a product of the thought,
but not of the thought itself.
And the reason for that is the speed at which it occurs.
When we slow this thought process down
and try to analyze it, what's occuring is the individual
is thinking with individual pictures,
and there are 32 individual frames per second.
Just like video, 30 frames per second.
Interesting.
They can do them one at a time.
But the thing is they wouldn't understand
what it is that they were doing.
Because we cannot be aware of anything
that happens faster than 24 in a second.
This is happening 32 in a second.
So it fits in to what's called the subliminal band.
When we are thinking non-verbally,
we are subliminally thinking.
We're not aware of what it is that's going on.
So, if what happens is,
we get used to the stimuli
that comes from it being rapid.
If we're not overwhelmed by it.
And the brilliance of all of this
is the way it's set up,
is that it's very hard for you to become
overwhelmed by it in the beginning.
So, you start out with it being slow
and then you control how fast it goes
and eventually, you're just absolutely flying.
What is occurring is, their brain chemistry is (mumbling),
probably in the form of endorphins,
from the amount of stimuli that we are receiving.
Those endorphins are a lot like drugs.
In fact, they are the natural drug store.
And we are actually becoming addicted
to a need for greater and faster stimuli.
And that's, I think, what it is that you're seeing.
What should occur is the education system
should look at what Nintendo does
to find out what it is that they are doing wrong.
because there are certain things that Nintendo does
that will get the child to sit there
to the point where they won't even go eat.
They've lost track of time.
They don't want to school.
Right.
The magic that Nintendo does is first of all,
it challenges the skill of the individual.
And there is no penalty for failure.
And it also has stimulated the curiosity
or stimulated some positive emotion in the individual
where at school, the only emotion
that gets stimulated at school is boredom.
And there is penalty for failure at school.
So how will we, since
that is the popular norm,
how are we going to even begin bridging
what appears to be rapidly becoming
an antiquated system of learning
with the new technologies available?
There are two answer that I can give.
There's a very cynical, honest one
and then there's the political correct one.
Which one do you want?
Would you give us both?
How about the honest one?
The honest one is, if we look at who it is
that is financing education, right,
it comes from the state government
and also through the federal government
and the decision was made by the federal government
that education in America was going to be free.
If you go back and look at the congressional records,
the speeches that were given to the congressmen
and the legislatures, legislator, legislators
at the time when these decisions were going to be made,
you would then begin to understand
what the purpose of education in America today is.
What is that?
Yeah, see you went through the system
and you don't even know what is.
No, not very successful.
I was born (mumbling).
You can ask the teachers what the
purpose of education is, they can't tell you.
They will give you a purpose, but it is not one
that is universally agreed upon.
And it certainly isn't the purpose that the
people that pay the bill have for providing it.
The purpose for education in America
is to provide controllable, docile citizens
that are willing to give up their lives
for the lies of the government.
That's the purpose of education.
And as long as that is the purpose for education,
we're not going to have a very good one.
Why?
Because what we've already got
is enough to fill up the military.
And the rest of us are too docile to make any changes.
So, the people that are paying the bills
are getting exactly what it is that they want
and everything else is just smoke screen and lip service.
The very first thing that would have to happen,
if we're going to see any change at all,
of any value at all in education,
we have to insist that our legislators
come up with the purpose of education
in America today.
And every teacher, every school administrator
and every student needs to know what that purpose is.
And from that purpose, then we can establish goals
that we can meet to enhance the fact
that that purpose is being satisfied.
And there should only be one purpose for education
and that is to prepare a human being for the future.
That should be the only reason for education.
Otherwise, why bother us with it?
Seems like an extremely
antiquated system already, doesn't it?
Yeah, well, if you really understand the history of it.
It always was.
If the American Central Intelligence Agency
came to me and asked me to create
a brainwashing system that we could
subject all of the people in America to,
that would ensure that we would have
a controllable, docile citizenry
that are willing to go to war,
you couldn't come up with a better system
than the one they've already got in place.
It is a perfect system for that.
So what is inevitably going to happen
then because now the kids have already
pushed beyond that point?
Well, the future is not going to tolerate it.
That might be an OK system for individuals
who are not capable of thinking,
but when you have a population that can think
with the 30 concepts that create
the concept of responsibility,
things are going to change.
They have to change.
Are they already beginning to change?
No.
Are you seeing huge disruptions
yet in the way--
No, no.
Not yet.
Why?
Because the individuals that are
going to be making those changes
are still considered that there's something wrong with them.
Our society is not geared for change.
We're seeing an evolution in the human species,
but the society itself is going to have to
also go through a evolution.
But the easiest way to change the society
is to change the individuals who are in society.
You can't have responsible government
until the people in government are responsible.
That's not happening yet.
Well...
Luckily that's not an area that I
have to waste any time on.
My job is in a different arena.
A place where I'm a lot more comfortable.
But there are people that are going
to have to address it sometime in the future.
Luckily, I won't even be around
to see it occur.
I don't have to endure anymore of it.
So what do you recommend at this point
for people who have these kids who are
already deeply ensconced in the world of technology,
who are bored out of their gourds,
who want to move at lightning speed,
who are creative by nature.
What do we do now?
There are millions of them.
One of the things that we have to realize
when we cause a change to occur
is that we have to live with the consequence of the change.
We have to adapt to the effect.
You and I would have difficulty adapting to it
simply because of the number of years
that we have been alive,
and we don't have that early training
of the amount of stimuli that they are experiencing.
So, we can't see that change
as being something that is negative,
simply because it would be difficult for us
to deal with that.
But, we also have to live with the consequence
and it's a lot like, you know the--
In my childhood, rock and roll music
was supposed to destroy the human race.
It didn't happen.
So, we can say, OK, we see these changes happening
in the human race and my God,
it would destroy the human race.
That also, is not going to happen.
It's either going to get better
or it's going to disappear.
I mean, that's the law of nature.
If you cannot adapt, then you're going to succumb.
What's our first step in adaptation?
Let's say that adaptation is desirable over succumbing.
If we're talking about addressing
something like autism, you have to eliminate
the reason why the problem exists.
And the reason the problem exists,
in my opinion, is that there is a genetic change
that has forgotten about one of the
early instincts that we have to have
in order to become a real human being.
We can add that part that's missing.
It's not going to be that difficult to do.
Is that the socialization part?
Those basic instincts?
Well, if we look at what it is to be a human being,
when we first come into this life,
I think we all come from the same place.
I got to stay there a little longer so,
I got a little more familiar with it.
We come from everything and nothing,
the void that is
both the penalty and the reward.
And the first job that we have to do
in order to become a human being
is we have to individuate into one of these things.
We have to figure out how to make it wiggle
the way we want it to wiggle.
We have to figure out how to get the perception
to be accurate.
I mean, what our eyes see is upside down
to what it is our brain sees.
We have to be able to make that adaptation.
We have to also be able to get our brains
to hear the sounds coming from the same place
where I see that it's coming from.
So we have to go through this individuation stage
and it takes about two years to be fully completed.
(background coughing)
Then the next step that we have to do,
once we become one of these things,
then we have to create an identity
for this thing that we have become.
So, we have to go through the process of creating
an identity for the individual
and it has to be something that
a two-year-old child could do.
Therefore, it has to be driven by some kind of
a natural instinct for us to do this.
And analyzing this,
the way we create our identity,
it starts with opinions.
There are very simple opinions like,
"I want a cookie" or "I want to go,"
and an opinion that is satisfied
doesn't create any identity.
It has to be an opinion that is
an opposed opinion.
The child says, "I want a cookie," and the mom says,
"Well, you can't have a cookie."
"I want a cookie."
"Can't have a cookie."
As simple as this mechanical piece is,
because the individual is experiencing
an opinion and an opposing opinion at the same time,
it creates a magical thing where
it now goes through time with the individual.
If this weren't occurring, we would be like
cows and horses and dogs and cats
living only in the moment.
But what we do, is we have the ability
to take the past with us
by creating a little piece of a core identity
that is composed of nothing more
than an opinion and an opposing opinion.
Then, anything in the future that we encounter
that either supports or invalidates that gets stuck to it.
And that is our real identity.
So we have these little bit and pieces of core identity
and we might only have, I don't know,
50 or 60, we might have over 100,
little pieces of core identity
that other pieces get stuck to.
Everything that we know is stuck to one of those things.
Every experience that you've ever had in your life
is stuck to one of those little cores somewhere.
Everything that you have learned
is also stuck to one of those little cores.
Every behavior that you manifest
is manifested to support your identity.
You don't do anything that doesn't support your identity.
This is why behavior modification does not work
because it doesn't alter the identity.
If you want to change somebody's behavior,
the only way you can do it is you have to
change their identity,
and have them have an identity
that doesn't need that behavior.
And then it disappears.
The other thing that we noticed,
is that a person's intellect or intelligence
is simply a reflection of our identity.
Intelligence as a thing doesn't not exist.
It is simply a reflection of the identity
of the individual.
The more identity the individual has,
the more intellect they have to have
in order to support the identity.
So, intelligence isn't something that we're born with.
It has nothing to do with how big your brain is
or how fast the synapse work.
It has to do with the identity
that you have created of who you are.
So then, if we have 500 percent increase
in these individuals with off-the-chart
quote IQs that are also labeled as autistic.
How does this fit in?
Is this coming in almost as a,
just a pure awareness without
a setup identity?
Well, they don't have that unless you interfere with it.
Unless you add the pieces that are missing.
The longer it takes for you to create
the core identity, the more identity
you're going to wind up having.
So, the thing is that
they don't finish that first step.
They're still stuck somewhere in the process
of individuality.
They are going to be very,
how would I say it?
They're going to be still a little bit of
everything and nothing at the same time.
So, they're basically in a
lengthened state of this pure awareness.
Like you say, this heightened senses
and heightened awareness
for many more years than an infant, for instance.
But, see, we don't have to give them that either.
We can work with them at the age of two,
and still accomplish everything that we need
as long as we know that what we have to do
is we have to build core identity
and then we can build identity on that core.
See, you can either have bigger core identity pieces
or more core identity pieces.
It doesn't really matter which is which.
So, the experiment that we're doing is with
more core identity pieces
and also more added to the core identity pieces
that is actually reality.
So, autism, unlocking the secrets
of autism at this point.
You've unlocked an awful lot of the secrets
of dyslexia already and ADD behavior
and you have an institute that is...
Is your group working internationally
at this point in time?
My work...
Nationally or more internationally?
Internationally.
Our dyslexia work is a lot more popular in Europe
than it is here in the United States.
Why is that?
They don't have the kind of opposition we have here.
There are four dyslexia societies in America
that don't want dyslexia to go away.
If dyslexia were to disappear,
there would be no reason for them to exist.
So, they really don't want to hear
that it is capable of making it go away.
And we're just being persistent.
We're going to keep going the way we're going.
And, well, you take a country like Switzerland,
has a much higher standard of living
than here in the United States,
and there also are some peculiarities there
if you are selling products in Switzerland,
and your product is the second-best product
that has ever been,
you're not going to sell any of them in Switzerland.
Because, I mean, it's the mentality
of the Rolex watch.
So we see that occurring there.
Switzerland, I live in the San Francisco Bay area,
the entire population of Switzerland
is smaller than the Bay Area population
and I think that there are probably
over 40 facilitators in Switzerland.
There might be as many a 60.
And in the Bay Area, here, we've got,
I think, five.
And the reason for that is,
in addressing learning disabilities,
it didn't take very long for them to
do their own studies and see that
this actually works.
And as a result of it, it's going in.
This that I'm talking about is the one-on-one
facilitator at work.
This is the mot inefficient method of addressing dyslexia.
It's very effective, but because of this inefficiency,
it's also very expensive.
A question that was asked of me,
something that I had though about an awful lot
before anybody got up the courage to ask,
and that is, would it be possible to
prevent dyslexia from occurring in the first place?
And the answer that I gave that person is,
probably.
If you take a series of steps and procedures
that a person, an adult person, has to go through
in order to correct their problem.
What would happen if someone
went through all those steps and procedures
before the problem ever even showed up.
So you're talking very early childhood?
Kindergarten to third grade.
And this is called Davis Learning Strategies.
And we're just barely getting it going here in America.
Where there are other places in the world
where it's going full blast,
like the country of Iceland.
We're already in 20 percent of
the school system in Iceland.
Will be 100 percent of their school system
within five years.
And this is because their purpose of education
is not the same as it is in the United States.
In addition to that, right after the second world war,
a study was done and as a result of the study,
it showed that the Icelandic people
were the most highly educated people in the world.
The most literate and highly educated.
And this remained that way
until 1997.
So from 1947 to 1997, they were the most
educated and most literate people in the whole world.
And then another study was done,
and they slipped from number one to number three.
Who was number one and two?
Well, I don't know.
Still, they're up there.
But, for having had all of those years,
almost 50 years of being number one,
to going to number three, that to them
is a major embarrassment.
They will do anything to get it back.
So they're interested in finding stuff that works.
One final question here.
Did your parents live long enough
to see the turnaround in you and your life
and your accomplishments?
And that's the first question.
I guess there's more than one left
then isn't there?
Well, I have to say, to some degree yes.
I don't know how interested my father was
in where things were going to go.
My father and I didn't have a very good relationship
as an infant or as a child.
He couldn't relate to me.
His only ability was on a physical level,
which means that there were a lot of beatings that happened,
and there's evidence of 36 broken bones
that I got between the ages of three and 13.
Later, I endured a great deal of therapy
trying to find the ability to forgive him.
One of the commandments of the religious belief
that I hold very dear is that I am
to honor my mother and father,
and how do you honor some raging beast
that broke your bones?
I eventually, not in therapy, eventually I found
the ability first to forgive myself
and to forgive him and everybody else.
And then I wanted to meet the man
that everyone else knew.
See, the only people that didn't like my father
were me and my mother.
I mean, he was a wonderful man.
He was a community leader,
he was this fantastic human being
until he came home and closed the door
and he became this raging monster.
Well, I wanted to meet the man
that everybody else knew and loved.
And every time I would get close,
he would run away.
He wouldn't let me meet him.
So I don't know what kind of feelings
he would have had.
I never had a conversation with him.
I never...
I don't know if I ever called him daddy.
It was my karma to be who I was in that role
and it's his karma to be on the other side of that.
And I think both of us filled whatever
our karmic requirements were very well.
Painful as it was, it was a gift.
And I found my own ability to forgive the two of us.
Yet, he went to his grave with the inability
to even look for it.
From that perspective, I don't know what that was.
In addition to that, my father would have seen
the time of being successful financially
as being more important than
my being successful on a different level
that has very little do with finances.
What about your mother?
My mother was quite different.
We had our center open and operating
for about four years upstairs
and a parent asked me what my mother
though about all this, and I said, I don't know.
I haven't even told her I'm doing it.
And Dr. Ali overheard me saying that
and she came out and she says,
"You haven't told your mother?
"Go in right now, you call her right this minute
"and you tell her."
And I said, well I know exactly what she's going to say.
And Fatima said, it doesn't matter what she says.
You have to go in there, you have to call her,
you have to tell her.
So, I did what I was told, I went in and I called her
and I told her and she said
exactly, word-for-word what I thought she was gonna say.
Which was?
"Oh Ronny, what do you want to have
"anything to do with people like that for?"
Wow.
I said, mom, because I am a people like that.
And he says, "Oh no Ronny, you're perfect."
And that was her denial.
I mean, that was her denial all along.
And there are millions of people
who are parenting that are living in that denial.
For me, my mother was an angel.
I mean, for my brother, she was a typical mother.
She had expectations for him.
My mother had absolutely no expectations for me at all.
She didn't put any requirements
or restrictions or anything in my way
and every little bit that I got was, for her,
just wonderful.
I say she was an angel.
There were a couple of things that she did that...
My older brother would spend days working on me
to get me to make a sound.
And then, I would make that sound in front of my mother
and she'd wash my mouth out with soap.
And I never understood it, but it has
made me dislike cilantro.
(chuckling)
You and me both.
It tastes like soap.
Tastes just like soap.
So uh...
But for me, because of the characteritics
that I had earlier of being right in people's faces
and staring, I knew all of,
everybody's facial features.
You know, I knew the colors of their eyes.
But I couldn't ever remember
the color of my mother's eyes.
When I would see images,
when I would remember her face,
I would just see the sparkle and the glow,
but I couldn't see the color until the day she died.
The day he died and that sparkle, that glow was gone,
then I could see what color her eyes were.
But it's amazing.
I don't know if it was psychological on my part
or if it was reality.
Maybe it was an expanded awareness
where just were seeing the essence
of who she is.
She was a pretty wonderful woman for me.
So many people would have been willing
to have me taken away, especially
right around the ages of seven and eight,
it was especially bad because I was a biter.
And around the age of eight is when
you can bite good enough that you can
bite pieces off.
So, that was a a rather hard time I think for her.
That and the very beginning.
I was born at the beginning of the second world war,
and she couldn't hold me or cuddle me
and she tried to breastfeed me
and I would just scream.
They figured out a way to lay me on a pillow
and then she would lay next to me
and not touch me and I would eat.
She said that only lasted for a couple of weeks
and then I was screaming again.
But my mom on a ranch in Texas,
out in the middle of nowhere, so she didn't really
have an education.
And she knew how to care for orphan lambs and cows,
and we couldn't get the rubber nipples for the bottles,
so she made nipples out of leather finger gloves.
The finger from a leather glove.
And to this day, I like the taste of wet leather.
(chuckling)
What an absolutely...
It sounds like she was, even though in denial,
an amazing woman, and what an amazing
life you've led.
I'm most anxious to see how your life
is going to impact all of these
brilliant little ones that are coming down the pike now.
Thank you very much.
I look forward to it too.
I have the good fortune of having seen a little bit of it.
And I know that
it is my purpose for being alive.
And I have to do this otherwise
there's no justification for breathing.
So, I will do it.
Thank you.
To learn more about Ron Davis'
innovative approach to dyslexia,
please click on the preview button once again
and you'll find a link to the
Davis Dyslexia Association International.
Until next time, thanks for watching.